On September 22, 2016 a mass of thunderstorms formed off Africa. On September 28, moving away from the Antilles (where it caused extensive damage to landmasses), with sustained winds of 60 mph, the storm gained tropical cyclone status when southeast of St. Lucia. It became Hurricane Matthew on September 29, when north of Venezuela and Columbia. On September 30, Hurricane Matthew became a significant hurricane, reaching Category 5, with wind speeds of 165 miles per hour, before moving to the Caribbean. It was the first Category 5 Atlantic hurricane since Felix in 2007, the deadliest since Stan in 2005, and the costliest since Sandy in 2012. Preparations, cancellations, warnings, and watches proceeded in the Windward Islands, Columbia (where one person drowned in a swollen river), and Jamaica. On October 4, Hurricane Matthew made landfall in Haiti’s Tiburon Peninsula with peak winds up to 145 mph as a Category 4 hurricane, and rainfall reaching over 30 inches. Hurricane Matthew caused a humanitarian crisis in Haiti, affecting over 2 million people, many needing clean water, food, shelter, sanitation, household goods, and medical supplies; more than 800 people died as a result of the storm. Dozens of cholera treatment centers were destroyed which led to a fear that the cholera epidemic would worsen. The World Health Organization began a vaccination campaign against cholera to avoid further spreading of the disease following Hurricane Matthew’s destruction. The disturbance caused by Hurricane Matthew caused the Haitian presidential election to be postponed. There were 546 fatalities in Haiti and damage costing $1.9 billion; this was Haiti’s worst disaster since the 2010 earthquake. Experts say that it will take at least 5 years to restore plantations of export crops like coffee, cocoa, and fruits. Four were killed in the Dominican Republic, which had heavy rainfall. On October 5, Hurricane Matthew hit eastern Cuba, resulting in 4 fatalities and $2.58 billion in losses, especially in the Guantánamo Province. The city of Baracoa suffered the most, with 25-foot waves crashing over the coast and many buildings collapsing. The Red Cross was ordered to rescue those trapped in collapsed buildings. On October 5 and 6, Matthew then moved through the northern islands of the Bahamas, directly hitting Grand Bahama. Peak-winds were 145 miles per hour, and peak rainfall was 20 inches. As Hurricane Matthew traveled through the Bahamas, the hurricane was classified as Category 3. There were no fatalities in the Bahamas. In response to the destruction Hurricane Matthew had caused, Florida Governor Rick Scott ordered the evacuation of 1.5 million people living in potential danger zones. President Obama also declared a state of emergency in both Florida and South Carolina, calling in the Department of Homeland Security to prepare relief measures. On October 6 and 7, Matthew moved along the entire length of the Florida Atlantic coastline, first as Category 3. It was downgraded to Category 2 late on October 7, then to Category 1 on October 8. The storm killed 12 people in Florida and 3 in Georgia. Over 1 million lost power in Florida, and more than half a million in Georgia and South Carolina. It made landfall on October 8 at Cape Romain National Wildlife Refuge near McClellanville, South Carolina, with 85 mph winds. 30 people were killed in North and South Carolina and 2 in Virginia; these states suffered flooding due to torrential rainfall, with portions of Interstate 95 shut down. Robeson County schools did not reopen till 31 October. The peak rainfall for Hurricane Matthew in the United States was about 20 inches in North Carolina. On October 9, turning away from Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, Matthew reentered the Atlantic as a post-tropical storm and moved along the eastern coastline towards Canada. The total damage to the United States is estimated at more than $10 billion, with more than 40 people dead. On October 10, Hurricane Matthew’s remnants hit Canada, specifically Newfoundland and Cape Breton, causing flooding, strong winds (over 56 mph), and power outages. There were no fatalities, but the total damage to Canada is estimated at $7.6 million. Most of this damage affected roads in Newfoundland. In Canada, Hurricane Matthew was absorbed by a cold front, and completed its 3,000-mile-long journey of destruction. Recovery and reconstruction continued into 2017 and 2018.
